PyDB — Complete Interview Preparation
1. Give me a 60-second overview of your project

PyDB is a mini relational database engine that I built from scratch in core Python to understand how a database works internally.

I implemented the complete pipeline from SQL parsing to query execution and storage. The architecture is roughly:

SQL → Lexer → Parser → Query Object → Executor → Table/Storage/Indexes

It supports CRUD operations, constraints such as primary key, unique, not-null and default, NULL handling, WHERE conditions, ordering, limiting, aggregation, GROUP BY, HAVING, aliases, transactions, persistence, hash indexes and B+Tree indexes.

I also implemented a lightweight query planner and execution statistics so I could see when an index is selected instead of a full scan.

The project has an interactive CLI and an extensive automated test suite.

The main goal was not to build a production database, but to understand the internal mechanics of one by implementing the pieces myself.

That should be your default opening answer.

2. Why did you build this?

This is one of the most important questions.

Answer

I wanted to understand databases below the SQL level.

Normally I can write:

SELECT * FROM users WHERE age = 25

using PostgreSQL or MySQL, but that doesn't explain what happens internally.

So I decided to build a simplified database engine myself and understand:

how SQL is tokenized
how SQL is parsed
how queries are represented internally
how the executor performs operations
how constraints are enforced
how indexes map values to records
how a B+Tree supports range queries
how data is persisted
how transactions can restore state
how a query planner chooses an access path

The project was mainly an exercise in understanding database internals.

Important

Do not say:

"I built my own production database."

Say:

"I built a simplified database engine for learning database internals."

That sounds much more credible.

3. What problem does PyDB solve?
Answer

PyDB solves a learning problem rather than a production business problem.

It demonstrates how a relational database can transform a high-level SQL statement into low-level operations on stored records.

The project gives me a working environment where I can observe concepts like parsing, indexing, query planning, persistence and transactions instead of treating the database as a black box.

4. Explain the architecture

This is probably your most important technical answer.

              SQL
               │
               ▼
            Lexer
               │
               ▼
            Parser
               │
               ▼
         Query Objects
               │
               ▼
        Query Executor
               │
       ┌───────┴────────┐
       ▼                ▼
     Table           Database
       │                │
       ├──── Index      └── Storage
       │
       ├──── Hash Index
       │
       └──── B+Tree Index
Explain it like this

I deliberately separated the system into layers.

The lexer converts raw SQL text into tokens.

The parser takes those tokens and builds a structured query object.

The query object represents what the user wants without executing it.

The executor interprets the query object and performs the operation.

The table manages schema, rows, constraints, Record IDs and indexes.

The storage engine handles persistence.

This separation means each component has one primary responsibility and can be tested independently.

5. Why did you use a lexer?
Answer

I didn't want the parser to work directly on raw strings.

The lexer converts SQL into meaningful tokens such as:

CREATE
TABLE
users
(
id
INT
PRIMARY
KEY
)

This makes the parser much simpler because it works with structured tokens instead of repeatedly manipulating raw strings.

Example
CREATE TABLE users (id INT);

becomes conceptually:

KEYWORD(CREATE)
KEYWORD(TABLE)
IDENTIFIER(users)
SYMBOL(()
IDENTIFIER(id)
KEYWORD(INT)
SYMBOL())
SYMBOL(;)
6. Why not parse SQL using string splitting?
Answer

String splitting works for trivial SQL but becomes fragile very quickly.

For example:

SELECT * FROM users
WHERE name = 'Aditya Garg';

Spaces inside strings, parentheses, operators, keywords and optional clauses make naive string splitting unreliable.

A lexer gives me a structured token stream, which makes the parser easier to reason about and extend.

7. What does the parser do?
Answer

The parser validates the token sequence against the grammar I support and creates a Query Object.

For example:

CREATE INDEX age_idx ON users(age) USING BTREE;

becomes conceptually:

CreateIndexQuery(
    index_name="age_idx",
    table_name="users",
    column_name="age",
    index_type="BTREE"
)

The executor then works with that object instead of parsing SQL itself.

8. Why Query Objects?
Answer

Query Objects separate what the user requested from how the database executes it.

For example:

SELECT ...

becomes a SelectQuery.

INSERT ...

becomes an InsertQuery.

That keeps the executor independent of SQL syntax.

It also makes testing easier because I can test the parser separately from execution.

9. What happens when you run SELECT?

Suppose the user runs:

SELECT name
FROM users
WHERE age > 25
ORDER BY name
LIMIT 3;
Answer

The SQL first goes to the lexer.

The lexer generates tokens.

The parser validates those tokens and creates a SelectQuery.

The executor receives the query object.

The executor gets the target table and evaluates the WHERE condition.

If the planner identifies a usable index, candidate Record IDs can be obtained from the index.

The matching rows are then evaluated and the remaining SELECT operations such as projection, ordering and limit are applied.

The final result is returned to the CLI.

10. Why did you create a separate Condition system?
Answer

I wanted WHERE logic to be independent from the table implementation.

So conditions are represented as objects such as:

Condition
BetweenCondition
LikeCondition
InCondition
AndCondition
OrCondition

This lets the table or executor ask a condition to evaluate a row without knowing the exact SQL syntax that produced that condition.

For:

WHERE age > 20 AND city = 'Delhi'

I can conceptually have:

AndCondition
 ├── age > 20
 └── city = Delhi
11. How did you implement constraints?

You should know these individually.

PRIMARY KEY
Answer

A primary key must uniquely identify a row.

I validate inserted and updated values against the existing primary-key values and reject duplicates.

A primary-key column also behaves as non-null because null cannot be used as the identifying value in the way I model the constraint.

UNIQUE

For a unique column, I check existing values before insert or update and reject duplicates.

NOT NULL

A NOT NULL constraint is checked during insert and update.

If the final value is None, I raise an error.

DEFAULT

DEFAULT is different from explicitly inserting NULL.

If the column is omitted during an INSERT and it has a default, I use the default.

If the user explicitly writes NULL, I preserve NULL instead.

Example:

CREATE TABLE users (
    city TEXT DEFAULT 'Delhi'
);

Then:

INSERT INTO users (id, name)
VALUES (1, 'Aditya');

produces:

city = Delhi

But:

INSERT INTO users (id, name, city)
VALUES (2, 'Rahul', NULL);

produces:

city = NULL

That distinction is important.

12. How did you implement NULL?
Answer

Internally I represent SQL NULL using Python None.

I had to handle NULL explicitly throughout the system rather than treating it like an ordinary value.

This affects:

comparisons
ordering
aggregation
insert/update
persistence
indexes

For example, COUNT(column) ignores NULL values while COUNT(*) still counts the row.

Important

Don't say:

NULL is just another value.

It isn't treated that way semantically in your engine.

13. Explain column-list INSERT

Example:

INSERT INTO users (id, name, age)
VALUES (1, 'Aditya', 22);
Answer

I don't directly insert the three supplied values into the physical row.

First I map the provided column names to values.

Then I iterate over the table's complete schema order.

For each column:

if the user supplied it, use that value
if the value is DEFAULT, use the column's default
if the column was omitted and has a default, use the default
if the column was omitted and is nullable, use NULL
otherwise reject the INSERT because a required value is missing

This converts a partial user row into a complete internal row.

That's a very good implementation answer.

14. How are rows stored?

Your answer:

Rows are represented as Python lists internally, while the schema is represented separately through Column objects.

I maintain the row data and schema metadata separately so operations such as constraint checks and column lookup can use the schema definition.

15. What is a Record ID?

This is a strong database-internals question.

Answer

I introduced a stable internal Record ID separate from the user's table columns.

For example:

Record ID 1 → [1, Aditya, 22, Delhi]
Record ID 2 → [2, Rahul, 25, Mumbai]

Indexes store Record IDs rather than entire rows.

The Record ID also gives the database an internal identity for a row that doesn't depend on the values of the row itself.

16. Why not use the primary key as the Record ID?
Excellent question.
Answer

Because an internal record identity and a user-defined primary key are conceptually different.

A primary key is part of the SQL schema and is user-visible.

A Record ID is an internal storage identity.

Keeping them separate makes indexes and storage independent from the user's schema decisions.

This is a strong answer.

17. Explain your hash index

Your structure is essentially:

value → set(record_ids)

Example:

22 → {1, 4, 8}
25 → {2, 7}
30 → {3}
Answer

My hash index is an in-memory dictionary-based index.

The key is the indexed column value.

The value is a set of internal Record IDs.

A set is useful because multiple rows can have the same value, and I need to avoid duplicate Record IDs.

Equality lookup is very simple:

index.lookup(25)

returns the Record IDs associated with 25.

18. Why a set instead of a single Record ID?

Because:

age = 25

could match:

Record IDs {2, 7, 9, 14}

So:

A single value may correspond to many rows. Therefore the index maps each key to a set of Record IDs rather than one Record ID.

19. What's the weakness of a hash index?
Answer

Hash indexes are naturally good for equality lookups but not for ordered range queries.

For:

WHERE age = 25

hash is useful.

For:

WHERE age > 25

hash does not naturally provide sorted traversal.

This leads naturally to your B+Tree.

20. Why did you implement B+Tree?
Answer

I wanted to understand why databases use ordered tree indexes instead of relying only on hash maps.

A B+Tree keeps keys ordered and supports efficient traversal of ranges.

That makes operations such as:

WHERE salary > 70000

or

WHERE age BETWEEN 20 AND 30

much more natural.

21. Explain your B+Tree

Your answer:

My B+Tree contains internal nodes and leaf nodes.

Internal nodes guide the search.

Leaf nodes contain the actual indexed key-value entries.

The leaves are linked, allowing sequential traversal across sorted keys.

During insertion, when a node exceeds its capacity, I split it and propagate the separator information upward.

This keeps the tree balanced.

22. Why linked leaves?
Answer

Linked leaves make range traversal efficient conceptually.

Once I find the first matching leaf for the lower bound, I can continue through neighboring leaves rather than repeatedly searching from the root.

This is exactly the reason B+Trees are useful for range scans.

23. Does your B+Tree support deletion?

Be honest.

Answer

Full physical B+Tree deletion with node merging, underflow handling and root shrink is not implemented yet.

The current index wrapper removes the Record ID from the bucket, but the empty key can remain structurally in the tree.

I deliberately left full node deletion as a future learning extension.

This answer is much better than pretending it exists.

24. How do indexes stay synchronized?

Very important.

INSERT

When a row is inserted:

row added
   ↓
Record ID generated
   ↓
every relevant index updated
DELETE
row removed
   ↓
Record ID identified
   ↓
Record ID removed from indexes
UPDATE

This is more interesting:

When an indexed column changes, I remove the Record ID from the old value's index entry and insert it under the new value.

Example:

age:
25 → Record 7

after:

UPDATE users SET age = 30 WHERE id = 7;

becomes:

25 → ...
30 → {7}
25. What happens if an index becomes stale?
Answer

That would be a correctness problem because the planner could return wrong candidate records.

That's why index maintenance is part of insert, update and delete operations rather than being treated as an optional background task.

I also have synchronization tests to verify index behavior after mutations.

26. Explain query planning
Answer

I implemented a lightweight rule-based planner rather than a full cost-based optimizer.

It looks at the WHERE condition and determines whether a usable index exists.

For equality conditions, a hash or B+Tree index may provide candidate Record IDs.

For range conditions, the B+Tree is naturally more useful.

Otherwise the executor falls back to a full scan.

Conceptually:

WHERE age = 25
        ↓
usable index?
   ┌────┴────┐
  YES        NO
   ↓          ↓
INDEX      FULL SCAN
27. Why didn't you build a full optimizer?
Answer

Because the purpose of this project is to understand the fundamentals.

A production optimizer involves statistics, cardinality estimation, join ordering, cost models and many other concerns.

I wanted first to understand the core mechanism of identifying candidate records through indexes.

This demonstrates scope control.

28. What is FULL_SCAN?
Answer

In a full scan, the executor considers every row in the table and evaluates the condition.

If the table has 10,000 rows, potentially all 10,000 rows are examined.

29. What is INDEX access?
Answer

The index first narrows the candidate Record IDs.

The executor then evaluates the actual rows associated with those candidates.

I still preserve table ordering in my current implementation, so the learning benefit is mainly visible in reducing condition evaluations rather than pretending the physical row traversal is fully optimized.

This last sentence is important because your stats architecture still visits rows to preserve ordering.

30. Explain .explain
Answer

.explain is an educational diagnostic feature.

It shows how PyDB plans a query, for example whether it considers:

FULL_SCAN
HASH INDEX
B+TREE INDEX

This lets me inspect the decision instead of treating execution as a black box.

31. Explain .stats
Answer

You can say:

.stats exposes execution metrics such as:

access_path
table_rows
table_rows_visited
index_candidates
condition_evaluations
rows_matched

I added this specifically to make query execution observable.

Then explain:

In the current architecture, indexed execution may still visit the table rows because I preserve table order, but the number of condition evaluations can still demonstrate that the index narrowed the candidate set.

That's a very strong honest answer.

32. Explain persistence
Answer

PyDB persists its state to a JSON file.

On save, the database serializes table definitions, rows, constraints, Record IDs and index metadata.

On startup, the storage engine reads the JSON and reconstructs the Database and Table objects.

33. Why JSON?
Answer

Because this project was about understanding persistence mechanics rather than building a binary page-oriented storage system.

JSON is simple, human-readable and sufficient for a learning implementation.

It allowed me to focus on database behavior first.

A production database would need a much more sophisticated storage layer with pages, buffers, logging and recovery.

34. What are the limitations of JSON storage?
Answer

JSON is not suitable for large-scale database storage because the entire logical structure is easy to rewrite and it doesn't provide the efficient page-level storage and recovery mechanisms used by real databases.

It is appropriate for the scale and learning purpose of PyDB.

35. Explain transactions
Answer

My transaction model is snapshot-based.

When BEGIN is executed, the database stores a snapshot of the current table state and dirty state.

Changes are applied normally.

ROLLBACK reconstructs the tables from the snapshot.

COMMIT persists the current state and clears the snapshot.

Conceptually:

BEGIN
  ↓
snapshot
  ↓
changes
  ↓
COMMIT → save
   OR
ROLLBACK → restore snapshot
36. What does rollback restore?

Your answer:

The snapshot includes table state, including rows and metadata such as indexes and Record IDs.

Therefore rollback can restore mutations involving rows, tables and indexes.

37. Is this full ACID transaction support?
Important interview question
Answer

No.

My transaction system demonstrates basic atomic rollback and commit semantics, but it is not a full production-grade ACID implementation.

It doesn't implement sophisticated concurrent isolation, write-ahead logging, crash recovery or MVCC.

Never claim full ACID.

38. Explain COMMIT vs ROLLBACK
BEGIN
   ↓
changes
   ↓
COMMIT
   → make current state durable

versus:

BEGIN
   ↓
changes
   ↓
ROLLBACK
   → restore previous snapshot
39. Why does .exit save?
Answer

Since PyDB is persistent, leaving the CLI with unsaved mutations could lose the user's work.

So the CLI checks the database dirty state and saves before a clean exit.

I also prevent exiting during an active transaction to avoid silently abandoning transactional state.

40. Explain the CLI
Answer

I built a lightweight interactive shell around the database engine.

It supports:

SQL statements
.help
.tables
.schema
.indexes
.explain
.stats
.exit
.quit

I also added multiline SQL input so statements such as CREATE TABLE can span multiple lines.

41. What is the difference between SQL commands and CLI commands?
SQL
CREATE TABLE ...
SELECT ...
INSERT ...
UPDATE ...
DELETE ...
CREATE INDEX ...
DROP INDEX ...
BEGIN;
COMMIT;
ROLLBACK;
CLI metadata commands
.help
.tables
.schema users
.indexes users
.explain ...
.stats ...
.exit

Explain:

SQL goes through the parser and executor. CLI meta-commands are handled by the shell itself.

42. Why CREATE INDEX is interesting

Example:

CREATE INDEX age_idx
ON users(age)
USING BTREE;
Answer

This demonstrates that index creation itself is part of the database command language.

The parser creates a CreateIndexQuery.

The executor resolves the target table and asks the table to build the requested index.

The table records the index metadata and builds the index from existing rows.

The database is marked dirty so the definition is persisted.

43. Why did you introduce named indexes?
Answer

Earlier, the table internally tracked indexes primarily by column.

SQL syntax requires an explicit index name:

CREATE INDEX age_idx ON users(age);

So I separated:

planner/index lookup structure

from:

SQL-visible index metadata

That allowed me to preserve the existing planner architecture while adding named SQL indexes.

This is a great architectural explanation.

44. Why use both hash and B+Tree indexes?
Answer

Because they demonstrate two different indexing strategies.

Hash:

equality

B+Tree:

ordered lookup
range queries

Having both makes the query-planning behavior much more educational.

45. How do you handle duplicate indexed values?

Example:

age = 25

for multiple users.

Answer

The index maps the value to a set of Record IDs.

Therefore:

25 → {2, 5, 9}

The index doesn't assume uniqueness unless the corresponding schema constraint requires it.

46. How does aggregation work?

Example:

SELECT AVG(age) FROM users;
Answer

The executor first obtains the rows matching the WHERE condition.

Then the aggregation layer evaluates the requested aggregate expression over those rows.

For COUNT(column), NULL values are ignored.

For COUNT(*), rows are counted regardless of individual column NULLs.

Similar logic is used for SUM, AVG, MIN and MAX.

47. Explain GROUP BY

Example:

SELECT city, COUNT(*)
FROM users
GROUP BY city;
Answer

I first obtain the relevant rows.

Then I partition them into groups using the GROUP BY columns.

For every group, the executor evaluates the SELECT expressions and aggregate functions.

The result is one output row per group.

Conceptually:

Delhi       → rows 1, 3, 5
Mumbai      → rows 2, 7
Chandigarh  → row 4

then:

Delhi       → COUNT = 3
Mumbai      → COUNT = 2
Chandigarh  → COUNT = 1
48. Explain HAVING vs WHERE

This is a classic interview question.

WHERE

Filters individual rows before grouping.

HAVING

Filters groups after aggregation.

Example:

SELECT city, COUNT(*)
FROM users
WHERE age > 20
GROUP BY city
HAVING COUNT(*) > 1;

Execution conceptually:

Rows
 ↓
WHERE
 ↓
GROUP BY
 ↓
HAVING
 ↓
SELECT
49. Explain aliases

Example:

SELECT salary AS income
FROM users
ORDER BY income DESC;
Answer

I treat aliases as metadata attached to SELECT expressions.

For normal ORDER BY processing, I resolve whether the ORDER BY name refers to an alias and translate it back to the underlying expression/column before table-level ordering.

That keeps aliases separate from actual schema column names.

50. What is one of the hardest bugs you encountered?

This is where you can tell a real project story.

Strong example: NULL

One challenging part was implementing NULL correctly.

Initially it's tempting to treat None like a normal Python value, but Python comparisons such as None < 20 can fail.

I therefore had to explicitly handle NULL semantics in conditions, sorting, aggregation, inserts, updates and persistence.

That taught me that database semantics often differ from normal language semantics.

51. Another good bug: test contamination

You actually encountered this.

Answer

During the index SQL work, many unrelated tests suddenly failed with:

Table 'users' already exists

The root cause was not the database engine. The new index tests were accidentally sharing a persistent JSON database file.

Once I changed the tests to use tmp_path, each test got an isolated database.

That was a useful lesson in distinguishing application bugs from test-environment and state-isolation bugs.

This is an excellent interview story because it demonstrates debugging.

52. How did you test the project?
Answer

I built tests by component as well as end-to-end.

I test:

lexer
parser
query objects
conditions
table behavior
database behavior
executor behavior
indexes
B-Tree/B+Tree
persistence
query planning
execution statistics
transactions
CLI
SQL index management

I also run a full regression suite after architectural changes.

You currently have a reported full-suite result of:

616 passed

But don't say that forever; quote the current test result from your terminal when presenting the project.

53. What would you improve next?

Good answer:

The next improvements I would make depend on whether the goal is learning or production.

For learning, I'd explore:

full B+Tree deletion
joins
composite indexes
page-based storage
buffer management
write-ahead logging
better query optimization
concurrency
stronger transaction isolation

Those would let me move from a logical in-memory database toward a more realistic storage engine.

54. What is NOT implemented?

Be ready with this.

Not a production DB
No full SQL grammar
No full join engine
No cost-based optimizer
No MVCC
No sophisticated locking
No WAL/crash recovery
No full B+Tree physical deletion
No page-based storage
No concurrent transaction isolation

This doesn't weaken the project.

It shows that you understand scope.

55. What would happen if the database had 10 million rows?
Answer

The current implementation would not scale well.

JSON persistence, Python list-based row storage and the current scan behavior are not designed for that scale.

The index structures would help with candidate lookup, but a production system would need page-based storage, a buffer pool, more efficient record access, cost-based planning and durable logging.

56. What would you change to make it production-ready?

Say:

1. Page-oriented storage
2. Buffer pool / caching
3. WAL
4. Crash recovery
5. MVCC or locking
6. Better transaction isolation
7. Cost-based query optimizer
8. Efficient B+Tree deletion
9. Joins
10. Better serialization/storage format
11. Concurrency control
12. Durability guarantees

Then say:

At that point, the project would become a much larger systems project.

57. Complexity questions

Know these approximately.

Hash lookup

Average:

O(1)
Hash insertion

Average:

O(1)
B+Tree search
O(log n)
B+Tree insertion
O(log n)
Full table scan
O(n)
Sorting

Typically:

O(n log n)
58. What is the biggest architectural decision you made?
Answer

The biggest decision was separating parsing from execution.

I could have written a large class that directly parsed and executed SQL, but that would become difficult to maintain.

Instead:

SQL
↓
Lexer
↓
Parser
↓
Query Object
↓
Executor

gave me clean boundaries and made the system much easier to test and extend.

59. Why is this better than writing everything in one class?
Answer

Because changes become localized.

Adding:

CREATE INDEX

mainly requires:

lexer support
parser support
Query Object
executor handling
table/index integration

rather than modifying one giant SQL execution function.

60. How would you add JOIN?

This is a great "future design" question.

Answer

I would introduce a Join representation at the query level, then extend the executor with a join phase.

Initially I could implement nested-loop join:

for each row in A:
    for each row in B:
        evaluate join condition

Later I could add hash joins or indexed joins.

A more sophisticated planner could choose the join algorithm based on available indexes and estimated cardinality.

Excellent answer.

61. How would you implement composite indexes?

Example:

CREATE INDEX idx
ON users(city, age);
Answer

I would represent the index key as a tuple:

("Delhi", 25)

rather than a single scalar value.

The B+Tree could then order tuple keys lexicographically.

Planner logic would need to understand which query predicates can use the composite index.

62. What if two rows have the same primary key?
Answer

The insertion is rejected before the row is committed to the table.

The constraint check happens before the mutation becomes part of the final table state.

63. What if an UPDATE violates UNIQUE?
Answer

I validate the new value before finalizing the update.

The update should be rejected rather than leaving the table in an inconsistent state.

64. What if UPDATE changes an indexed column?
Answer

I must update both the row and the relevant index entry.

Specifically:

old value → remove Record ID
new value → add Record ID

Otherwise the index becomes stale.

65. What happens when you DROP INDEX?
Answer

The executor resolves the named index, the table removes its index structure and metadata, and the database is marked dirty so that the new schema/index state is persisted.

66. Why have both indexes and index_definitions?
Answer

This is an important PyDB-specific question.

Answer

They represent two different concepts.

indexes / bplus_indexes are execution structures organized by column so the planner can quickly access them.

index_definitions stores SQL-visible index metadata such as:

index name
index type
column

Separating those allows me to support SQL index names without destroying the existing planner organization.

67. Why not expose Record IDs in SELECT?
Answer

Record IDs are internal implementation details.

They exist to support storage and indexing, but they are not part of the user's schema.

Exposing them would couple the SQL interface to internal storage representation.

68. Why is the project called PyDB?

Simple:

Python Database — a database engine implemented in Python.

69. If interviewer asks: "Isn't this just SQLite recreated badly?"

Do not become defensive.

Say:

It is intentionally much smaller than SQLite.

SQLite is a mature production database with a sophisticated storage engine, optimizer, recovery mechanisms and many years of engineering.

PyDB is a learning implementation where the value is that I understand how the major components work because I built simplified versions myself.

That's the correct positioning.

70. If interviewer says "What did YOU actually write?"

Very important.

Don't answer:

"I used Python and implemented database stuff."

Instead:

I implemented the SQL tokenizer, parser, query model, executor, table and constraint handling, hash indexing, B+Tree indexing, query planning, transaction snapshot logic, JSON persistence and the interactive CLI myself as part of the project.

Then be prepared to explain each one.

71. The complete request flow you should memorize

This is the single most important flow.

User enters:

SELECT name
FROM users
WHERE age > 25;


        ↓

      Lexer


        ↓

      Tokens


        ↓

      Parser


        ↓

  SelectQuery object


        ↓

   QueryExecutor


        ↓

     Database


        ↓

       Table


        ↓

 Query Planner / Index


        ↓

 Candidate Record IDs


        ↓

 Condition evaluation


        ↓

 Projection / Ordering / Limit


        ↓

     Result rows


        ↓

       CLI

When you can explain this confidently, the project starts feeling much easier in an interview.

72. Your 2-minute deep technical explanation

Memorize the structure, not the exact words:

PyDB is a simplified relational database engine implemented in Python to understand database internals.

The system is layered. A SQL statement first passes through a lexer which converts it into tokens. The parser validates the token sequence and constructs a query object such as SelectQuery, InsertQuery or CreateIndexQuery.

The QueryExecutor then executes that object against the Database and Table layers.

Tables maintain schema, rows, constraints and stable internal Record IDs. Record IDs are separate from user-defined primary keys and are used by indexes.

For indexing, I implemented both hash indexes and a B+Tree. Hash indexes provide efficient equality lookup, while B+Trees maintain ordered keys and support range searches.

I also added a lightweight query planner that selects between full scans and available indexes, and execution statistics to make that decision observable.

The database state is persisted to JSON and transactions are implemented using snapshots for rollback and commit behavior.

Finally, I built a CLI that exposes SQL commands plus diagnostic commands such as .schema, .indexes, .explain and .stats.

The project's main objective wasn't production scalability; it was understanding how the major pieces of a database work together.

73. Questions you absolutely must be able to answer without hesitation

Before putting PyDB on your resume, you should be comfortable answering these:

1. Why did you build PyDB?
2. Explain the architecture.
3. Explain the SQL execution flow.
4. What does the lexer do?
5. What does the parser do?
6. Why Query Objects?
7. How are WHERE conditions represented?
8. How are constraints enforced?
9. How is NULL represented?
10. How does column-list INSERT work?
11. What is a Record ID?
12. Why separate Record ID and primary key?
13. How does the hash index work?
14. Why use a set in the index?
15. Why did you implement B+Tree?
16. How does B+Tree insertion work?
17. Why are B+Tree leaves linked?
18. How does a range query work?
19. Does your B+Tree support deletion?
20. How are indexes synchronized after UPDATE?
21. What happens after deleting an indexed row?
22. How does query planning work?
23. FULL SCAN vs INDEX?
24. What does `.explain` show?
25. What does `.stats` show?
26. How does persistence work?
27. Why JSON?
28. How do transactions work?
29. Is it fully ACID?
30. How does rollback work?
31. How does GROUP BY work?
32. WHERE vs HAVING?
33. How do aliases work?
34. What happens during CREATE INDEX?
35. What happens during DROP INDEX?
36. Why separate index metadata from index structures?
37. What happens if an indexed column is updated?
38. What happens if UNIQUE is violated?
39. What happens if PRIMARY KEY is duplicated?
40. What are the limitations?
41. How would you make it production-ready?
42. How would you implement JOIN?
43. How would you implement composite indexes?
44. What was your hardest bug?
45. How did you test it?
74. The biggest interview mistake to avoid

Don't spend the interview saying:

"I used Python dictionary for the index."

That's only the implementation detail.

The stronger answer is:

"I needed efficient equality lookup, so I chose a hash-based structure mapping indexed values to Record IDs. That gives average O(1) equality lookup. For range queries, that approach isn't naturally ordered, so I implemented a B+Tree."

That's the difference between:

"I wrote code."

and:

"I made engineering decisions."
75. Your mental model for the whole project

Remember PyDB as 8 concepts:

1. PARSE
   Understand SQL

2. REPRESENT
   Query Objects

3. EXECUTE
   Executor

4. STORE
   Tables + JSON persistence

5. IDENTIFY
   Record IDs

6. INDEX
   Hash + B+Tree

7. PLAN
   Choose access path

8. TRANSACT
   BEGIN / COMMIT / ROLLBACK

Everything you built fits into those eight ideas.

That is how you should think about PyDB in an interview—not as 20 Python files, but as one database pipeline with understandable responsibilities.