PyDB — Interview Answer Sheet
1. "Tell me about your PyDB project."

PyDB is a SQL-like relational database engine that I built from scratch in Python.

I started with the goal of understanding what happens internally when a SQL query is executed instead of only using databases through an API.

The first version implemented the complete query flow: SQL goes through a lexer and parser, gets converted into query objects, then the query executor operates on tables and storage. I added CRUD operations, constraints, transactions, persistence, hash indexes, B+Tree indexes and a basic query planner.

Then I extended it into PyDB V2, which I call the Time Machine. The idea was to make database state versioned and explorable. Every mutation creates an immutable historical version. I added branches, checkout, diff, replay, historical query comparison, hypothetical index analysis and three-way branch merging with conflict detection.

So V1 answers "What is the database now?", while V2 also answers "How did the database get here, how did it evolve, and what happens if two histories are combined?"

2. "Why did you build a database? There are already PostgreSQL and MySQL."

I wasn't trying to replace PostgreSQL or MySQL. My purpose was to understand database internals by implementing a simplified engine myself.

Using PostgreSQL would teach me how to use a database. Building PyDB taught me what happens inside the database when I execute a query.

For example, implementing indexes forced me to understand why a hash index is useful for equality while a B+Tree is useful for ordered range queries. Implementing versioned merges forced me to think about immutable state, ancestry and conflict resolution.

This is a very important distinction.

Don't say:

"I created a better PostgreSQL."

Say:

"I built a simplified database engine to understand the concepts behind real database systems."

3. "How does your architecture work?"

Draw this:

SQL
 ↓
Lexer
 ↓
Parser
 ↓
Query Object
 ↓
QueryExecutor
 ↓
Database
 ↓
Table
 ├── Rows
 ├── Constraints
 ├── Hash Index
 └── B+Tree Index
 ↓
Storage

Then explain:

The lexer breaks the SQL string into tokens.

The parser converts those tokens into structured query objects such as SelectQuery, InsertQuery or UpdateQuery.

The QueryExecutor takes those objects and performs the operation.

The Database manages tables, transactions, persistence and, in V2, version history.

The Table owns the actual rows, schema, constraints and indexes.

Finally, the storage layer persists the serialized state.

4. "How did you create it from scratch?"

I didn't start by writing everything at once. I built it incrementally.

First I implemented the table and basic CRUD operations.

Then I added a lexer and parser so the system could understand SQL-like commands.

After that I introduced a query-execution layer so parsing and execution were separated.

Then I added constraints, NULL handling, transactions and persistence.

Once the basic engine was stable, I introduced indexing and query planning.

Finally, V2 was built on top of the existing engine by treating database states as immutable historical versions and connecting those versions through branches.

A strong phrase:

"I built the engine incrementally and kept the layers separate so new functionality didn't require rewriting the core."

5. "How does a SELECT query work in your system?"

Suppose:

SELECT name
FROM users
WHERE salary > 50000;

Say:

The lexer first tokenizes SELECT, name, FROM, users, WHERE, salary, > and 50000.

The parser turns those tokens into a SelectQuery object containing the table, selected columns and condition.

The executor identifies the table and asks the table's planning logic for an access path.

If there is a suitable B+Tree index on salary, the planner can use a range lookup instead of scanning every row.

The candidate rows are then evaluated against the condition, projected into the requested columns, and returned.

6. "How did you implement indexing?"

I implemented two simplified index structures.

The first is a hash index, which maps a value to the internal Record IDs containing that value. It's useful for equality lookups.

The second is a B+Tree-based index, which keeps keys ordered and supports equality and range lookups.

Whenever a row is inserted, updated or deleted, the corresponding indexes are updated as well. This was important because an index is derived data, so it must stay consistent with the table.

Example:

Hash:

50000 → {7, 14, 22}

B+Tree:

10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000

Then:

WHERE salary > 50000

can use the ordered structure.

7. "How does your query planner work?"

My planner is deliberately simplified, but it chooses between different access paths based on the predicate and available indexes.

For an equality predicate, it can choose a hash index or B+Tree equality lookup.

For an ordered range predicate such as salary > 50000, it can choose a B+Tree range lookup.

Otherwise it falls back to a full table scan.

I also exposed .explain and .stats so I could see not just the result but the selected access path and execution statistics.

8. "Why did you use internal Record IDs?"

This is a very good interview question.

I separated internal row identity from user-visible primary keys.

Every row gets an internal Record ID that the storage engine uses for indexing and historical comparison.

That gives me a stable physical identity even when the user-facing columns change.

This became especially important in V2 because branches can create rows independently. A numeric internal ID created after a branch split is branch-local and doesn't automatically mean two rows are the same logical row.

That answer demonstrates deeper thinking.

9. "How did you implement transactions?"

I implemented transactions using a database snapshot.

When BEGIN is called, I save the current database state. Mutations can then happen against the live state.

On COMMIT, the changes are preserved and represented as a single historical transaction version.

On ROLLBACK, I reconstruct the previous state from the snapshot.

This is a simplified transaction model; it isn't intended to reproduce PostgreSQL's MVCC or locking system.

That final sentence is important because it shows technical honesty.

10. "What is the most interesting part of V2?"

Say:

The most interesting part for me was turning the database into a versioned system.

Instead of storing only the current database state, every mutation produces an immutable snapshot.

Those versions form a history, and branches are basically named pointers to versions.

Once merging was introduced, the structure stopped being a simple tree and became a DAG because a merge version has two parents.

Then draw:

        V5 MERGE
       /        \
     V3          V4
      \          /
          V2

Then:

That was one of the main conceptual jumps from V1 to V2.

11. "How does .merge work?"

This is probably the most important PyDB interview question.

Say:

I use a three-way merge.

I take three states:

the common ancestor,
the current target branch,
the source branch.

For every piece of state, I compare what changed relative to the common ancestor.

If only one side changed something, I keep that change.

If both sides made the same change, I keep it once.

If both sides changed the same logical data differently, I report a conflict.

Example:

Base       = "Aditya"
Main       = "Main"
Experiment = "Experiment"

Therefore:

CONFLICT
12. "How did you handle Record ID collisions during merge?"

This is an excellent advanced question.

A Record ID created before branching can represent the same logical row across both branches.

But a Record ID created independently after branching is branch-local.

So I cannot assume:

Record ID 2 == same row.

When two independently created rows happen to receive the same internal ID, I preserve both rows and remap one internal ID instead of treating them as an update conflict.

The source-side ID is kept and the target-side row is remapped in my current deterministic merge policy.

Then add:

I also separately validate primary-key constraints because physical Record ID collision handling and logical primary-key uniqueness are different problems.

That is a very strong answer.

13. "What happens if two branches update the same row differently?"

If that row existed in the common ancestor, its Record ID represents a shared logical identity.

Suppose:

Base = [1, "Aditya"]

Main = [1, "Main"]

Experiment = [1, "Experiment"]

Both branches changed the same logical row differently, so the merge reports a row_conflict.

I intentionally don't silently choose one side.

14. "What happens if one branch deletes a row and the other updates it?"

That's also a conflict.

One branch says the row should no longer exist, while the other says it should exist with a different value.

There isn't enough information to safely choose automatically, so I report a conflict.

15. "How do you make sure a failed merge doesn't corrupt the database?"

I don't modify the live state while calculating the merge.

I first reconstruct the ancestor, target and source states and build a proposed merged state.

Then I validate the merged tables and constraints.

Only after validation succeeds do I restore the live database and create the merge version.

So if there is a conflict, there is no merge commit and the existing branch heads and database state remain unchanged.

That is your atomicity answer.

16. "Why did you make historical versions immutable?"

Because otherwise history would be meaningless.

If version 2 and the live table shared the same mutable row list, then a later UPDATE could accidentally modify what version 2 claimed happened in the past.

So historical states are deep-copied and treated as immutable snapshots.

I also wrote dedicated regression tests for INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE and branch divergence to make sure later mutations cannot alter old versions.

17. "Why do you need a DAG instead of a normal tree?"

Before merging, each version normally has one parent, so the history behaves like a tree.

After a merge, the resulting version represents two histories simultaneously. It therefore has a normal parent for the target branch and a second parent for the source branch.

That makes the history a DAG.

I had to update ancestor traversal so it follows both parent relationships.

18. "What is .diff doing?"

.diff compares two historical database states semantically rather than just doing a raw JSON comparison.

It identifies tables added or removed, schema changes, index changes, rows added or removed, and rows updated.

When comparing branches, I also use their common ancestor so independently-created Record IDs aren't incorrectly reported as updates.

19. "What is .replay?"

.replay re-executes the SQL associated with a historical mutation against the current database.

That's different from .checkout.

.checkout restores a historical state.

.replay executes an old operation again and therefore creates a new version.

Very important:

checkout = restore state
replay   = repeat operation
20. "What is .compare?"

.compare lets me run the same SELECT against two historical versions and compare both the logical result and execution behavior.

For example, a query could return the same rows in both versions while one version uses a full scan and the other uses a B+Tree range lookup.

So it helps analyze how database evolution affects query behavior.

21. "What is .whatif?"

.whatif lets me simulate the effect of creating an index without actually modifying the database.

I create a temporary copy of the current table, add the hypothetical index only to that copy, run the same SELECT against both versions, and compare the execution statistics.

That lets me answer questions like:

"Would adding a B+Tree on salary change the access path?"

22. "Why did you build .compare and .whatif?"

I wanted V2 to be more than version rollback.

Version history tells me what happened.

Diff tells me what changed.

Replay lets me reproduce an operation.

Compare lets me study how queries behave across historical states.

What-if lets me experiment with database design without applying the change.

Together, they make the history useful for analysis, not just recovery.

23. "What testing did you do?"

Say this confidently:

I developed the project incrementally with regression testing after each major feature.

I tested CRUD, parsing, constraints, indexes, transactions, persistence, version history, branches, checkout, diff, replay, historical comparison, what-if analysis, merge, DAG traversal, immutability, atomicity and CLI behavior.

I also wrote targeted tests for edge cases such as Record ID collisions, primary-key conflicts, delete-versus-update conflicts, repeated merges and persistence after restart.

Then give your current result:

731+ original/core tests
+
V2 hardening tests
=
full suite passing

Use the exact final pytest number from your latest run in the actual interview rather than memorizing a stale number.

24. "What was the hardest bug?"

This is a great story.

One of the hardest bugs was related to historical snapshot mutation during branching and merging.

I initially thought the merge algorithm was wrong because a conflicting update was being reported as a clean merge.

After tracing the historical states, I found that mutable nested table data could be shared between the live database and historical snapshots.

That meant a later branch mutation could change what should have been an immutable ancestor.

I fixed that by deep-copying serialized state when creating and restoring historical versions and then added explicit immutability tests.

That was a good lesson that correctness problems in stateful systems aren't always caused by the algorithm itself—they can come from object ownership and mutation.

This is an excellent interview story because it shows debugging ability, not just coding.

25. "Why Python?"

I chose Python because I wanted to focus on the database concepts rather than spending most of my time on language overhead.

Python also made it easy to build the lexer/parser, data structures, serialization and test infrastructure quickly.

For a learning-oriented database engine, it gave me fast iteration while still letting me implement indexes, trees, persistence and transactions explicitly.

26. "Could you create this again now from scratch?"

This is where you should be realistic.

Yes. I could recreate the architecture from scratch now because I understand the design rather than just the implementation.

I would start with the same layered structure:

Lexer → Parser → Query Objects → Executor → Database → Table → Storage

Then I'd implement the features incrementally and write tests alongside them.

I would also design historical state ownership and Record ID semantics earlier because those became important once branching and merging were introduced.

That last sentence is especially good because it shows you've learned from the project.

27. "Would you build it the same way again?"

Don't say simply yes.

I would keep the high-level architecture, but I would make a few design decisions earlier.

First, I'd establish immutable state boundaries from the beginning.

Second, I'd define the distinction between physical Record IDs and logical primary keys before implementing branching.

Third, I'd design the history model with DAG semantics in mind rather than extending a single-parent version model later.

The current implementation evolved incrementally, which was good for learning, but a second implementation could incorporate those lessons earlier.

That is a much stronger answer than pretending your first implementation was perfect.

28. "Could you implement this using PostgreSQL?"

Yes, but it would become a different project.

PostgreSQL could provide the underlying storage, transactions and indexing, while I could build the version-management and analysis layer on top.

But then I wouldn't be implementing the database engine itself.

For this project, I intentionally wanted to control the storage and execution layers so I could demonstrate understanding of database internals.

29. "Could you create this in Java?"

Yes.

The architecture is language-independent.

I could recreate the same pipeline in Java using classes for tokens, parser nodes, query objects, executor, table structures, indexes, storage and version history.

The implementation details would change, but the architectural concepts would remain the same.

This connects nicely with your Java learning path.

30. "What other technology could you use instead?"

For the database itself:

Python
Java
C++
Rust
Go

For storage:

JSON
binary files
page-oriented files
SQLite
PostgreSQL

For indexes:

Hash table
B+Tree
LSM Tree

For transaction/versioning:

Snapshot-based
WAL-based
MVCC
Copy-on-write

Then explain:

I chose the simpler implementations because the primary purpose was learning and demonstrating the concepts. A production system would use significantly more sophisticated storage, concurrency and recovery mechanisms.

31. "Could you make it production-ready?"

Don't claim yes immediately.

Say:

The current PyDB is a serious educational and systems project, but I wouldn't call it production-ready.

To move toward production, I would need a durable write-ahead log, crash recovery, a page-oriented storage engine, buffer management, concurrency control, stronger transaction isolation, more complete SQL compatibility, better query optimization and much stronger durability guarantees.

The current version demonstrates the architectural concepts, while productionizing it would be another major engineering phase.

That's honest and technically strong.

32. "What would you improve next?"

You can answer in phases.

Storage

Replace JSON snapshots with a page-oriented storage engine and durable WAL.

Transactions

Introduce proper concurrency control and MVCC-style version visibility.

Query optimizer

Move from rule-based access-path selection toward cost-based optimization.

SQL

Support a larger subset of SQL.

Versioning

Improve merge conflict resolution and perhaps add explicit conflict-resolution commands.

33. "Is this innovative?"

Be careful.

Don't say:

"Nobody has done this."

Say:

The individual ideas aren't new concepts in isolation—version control, immutable snapshots, branching and merging all exist elsewhere.

What I built is a database engine that combines those ideas directly into the database's own historical state and query workflow.

I would describe it as a distinctive portfolio/system-design project rather than claiming that the underlying concepts are unprecedented.

That is the safest and strongest way to present it.

34. "Why call it Time Machine?"

Because V2 isn't limited to restoring a backup.

I can move through historical states, compare different states, replay old operations, analyze query behavior across versions, simulate indexing decisions, create alternative branches and merge divergent database histories.

So the idea is closer to exploring the evolution of the database rather than simply restoring it.

35. "Give me the project in 30 seconds."

Memorize this:

PyDB is a SQL-like database engine I built from scratch in Python to understand database internals. V1 implements parsing, query execution, constraints, transactions, persistence, indexing and basic query planning. In V2, I extended it into a versioned database called Time Machine, where every mutation creates an immutable historical state. I added branches, checkout, diff, replay, historical query comparison, hypothetical index analysis and three-way merges with conflict detection and atomic failure handling.

36. "Explain the project in 10 seconds."

I built a small database engine from scratch, then turned it into a version-controlled database where data can branch, be compared, replayed and merged.

37. The most important diagram to remember

Whenever you get stuck in an interview, draw:

                    SQL
                     ↓
                   Lexer
                     ↓
                   Parser
                     ↓
                Query Object
                     ↓
               QueryExecutor
                     ↓
                  Database
                  /      \
                Table   History
                /  \        |
             Index Storage Version
                       ↓
                     Branch
                       ↓
                      Diff
                       ↓
                    Replay
                       ↓
                    Compare
                       ↓
                    What-if
                       ↓
                     Merge
                      / \
                 Target Source
                      \ /
                     DAG

Then say:

"This is the architecture I designed the project around."

38. If interviewer says: "Show me how you'd create it again right now."

Give them this sequence:

1. Create Token classes.
2. Build Lexer.
3. Build Parser.
4. Define Query Objects.
5. Build QueryExecutor.
6. Build Table and schema layer.
7. Add constraints.
8. Add storage/persistence.
9. Add hash indexing.
10. Add B+Tree.
11. Add query planning.
12. Add transactions.
13. Add immutable Version.
14. Add HistoryManager.
15. Add branches.
16. Add historical operations.
17. Add three-way merge.
18. Add DAG traversal.
19. Add persistence for the DAG.
20. Add CLI commands.
21. Add regression tests.

And the key phrase:

"I would implement it in layers and validate each layer before moving to the next."

39. One thing you should never do in the interview

Don't describe PyDB as:

"I made a mini database with some SQL commands."

That undersells it enormously.

Describe it as:

"I implemented a layered SQL processing engine and then extended its state model into an immutable, branch-aware historical DAG with three-way merge semantics."

That's technically accurate and communicates the depth of the project.

40. Your strongest technical keywords

When appropriate, these are the concepts behind the project:

Lexical analysis
Parsing
Query objects
Query execution
Relational data model
Constraints
Indexing
Hash indexing
B+Tree
Range lookup
Query planning
Persistence
Transactions
Snapshots
Immutability
Version graph
Branching
DAG
Three-way merge
Conflict detection
Atomicity
Historical replay
Query comparison
Hypothetical planning
Regression testing

The trick is not to throw these words around. Use them when explaining an actual implementation decision.

41. Final interview mindset

The interviewer is likely to care less about whether you remember every method name and more about whether you can answer:

Why did you design it this way?
What problem does this solve?
What happens internally?
What alternatives did you consider?
What bug did you encounter?
How did you debug it?
What are the limitations?
How would you improve it?
Could you build it again?

For PyDB, you're now in a good position because you can answer all of those with actual implementation experience rather than theoretical explanations.